---
title: 'Basic ideas of General Relativity'
date: 2019-07-01
permalink: /posts/2019/07/blog-post-2/
tags:
  - Notes
  - physics
  - Other topics
---

In this semester(Spring 2019), I took a course about General Relativity directed by [Pengjie Zhang](https://www.physics.sjtu.edu.cn/zhangpj). During reviewing the final exam, I read the class note and some comprehensions occurred to me which I would like to share with your in this blogs. I'm sorry for the poor communication(I'm not a native English speaker) and some potentially wrong understanding which may mislead you. I'm not an expert but a naive student in this area. However, I believe my identity of students may make you feel free to figure out my wrongs and promote our further and deeper discussion(That's why I'd like to discuss with peers). So, please contact with me by any way you like. Enjoy yourselves in GR!

## GR123, an Introduction
Prof. Zhang summarizes GR by 1 principle, 2 equations and 3 applications(which is also the key points of final :sob:).
+ 1 principle
  + Equivalence Principle(EP)
    + Weak EP(WEP)
    + Einstein EP(EEP)
    + Strong EP(SEP)
+ 2 Equations
  +  geodesic equation
  +  Einstein's field equation
+ 3 applications
  + Strong Fields: The Black Hole
  + Weak Fields: The gravitation waves.
  + Cosmology.

In general, the GR suggest that **The matters tell space-time how to bending, the space-time tells matters how to move.** which was describe mathematically by Einstein's field equation and geodesic equation. If you can't understand, you can watch this [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MTY1Kje0yLg&t=428s) for further understanding.

In this post, I would like to introduce some basic knowledge about GR including the equivalence principle, the geodesic equation and its "deviation" which introduce the Riemann tensor and Einstein tensor. Further, after some discussion about energy momentum tensor, we can admire Einstein's great equation and its consequences(absolutely deferent from Newtonian.) Finally, an exact solution known as Schwarz's solution was also been introduce.

## Equivalence Principle

### All frameworks are created equally.

From the very beginning of GR, why Einstein believes that Newtonian Gravitation theory is not complete? As all of us know, it is seldom to see any gravitational phenomenon which can not be described by the law of gravity:

$$
F=G\dfrac{Mm}{r^2}
$$

So, what defect in Newton's theory inspires Einstein to think about the GR? The first opinion I want to share you is that **None of reference frame is "special"**.

This fact together with constant lightspeed leads to special relativity, in which we know that no matter you are still, walking or run, all physical laws hold in your frameworks unless you are accelerating. The theory of SR is so successful but still leaves a blank: what happens in an accelerated world? 

Now, image a free-falling particle on the earth, Newton's second law tell us that:

$$
ma=-G\dfrac{Mm}{r^2}
$$

Nothing special is it? However, in the frame of the particle itself, the viewer doesn't agree, she/he thinks that:"The particle doesn't have any acceleration, so it is on mechanical balanced!" We can rewrite the equation by introducing additional force term.

$$
0=-G\dfrac{Mm}{r^2}-ma=m(-\dfrac{GM}{r^2}-a)
$$

These are well-know result in high school. However, the pseudo-force theory is not complete.

  1. The acceleration just like some additional gravitational field provided by no one which doesn't consist with Newton's 3rd law. 
  2. **We unavoidably introduced a special frameworks where no pseudo-force is needed and universal gravitation holds**

It's nothing wrong if you keep going with pseudo-force and you will generate Newtonian gravitation theory think this additional field is fake(pseudo-force) although your may miss something beautiful. But Einstein , who believes that **Nothing is special**, doesn't agree. If you abandon the stereotype of Newtonian mechanics, there is no reason for overstating the gravity and downplaying the acceleration.

So, Einstein suggest that: Both law of gravitation and acceleration are **fake**, the gravitation and acceleration are both some intrinsic property or the "bending" of space-time. Here we state the weak equivalence principle: **For uncharged test particle at any space-time point, there is a local inertial frame(LOF), in which the particle feels no gravitation and inaccelerated** The restriction on charge is because the acceleration radiation is not easy to deal, so we exclude it from our theory.

Not as trivial as in Newtonian mechanics, the motion of particle in LOF is forced neither by "gravity" nor "pseudo-force" but follow the wrinkle of space-time. In next section we will introduce that "wrinkle function"

## The Geodesic Equation
The consequence of WEP tell us how particles move is gravitational field. Before we begin the trip, some notation must be introduced:

1. The Greek letters $\mu, \eta, \nu$ run from 0 to 3 represent the time and space parts. 

2. The Latin letters i, j, k run from 1 to 3 and represent the space parts.
3. $\hbar=c=1$

4. The $\eta_{\mu\nu}$ is the special relativity metric, $diag\{-1,1,1,1\}$

5. Einstein sum rule: the same upper index and lower index should be sum up, say: $A^\mu A_{\mu}=A^0 A_{0}+A^1 A_{1}+A^2 A_{2}+A^3 A_{3}$

6. $A_{\mu,\nu}$ is the abbreviation of $\dfrac{\partial A_{\mu}}{\partial x^\nu}$

7. $A_{\mu}^{\nu}$ is the abbreviation of $\dfrac{\partial A_{\mu}}{\partial x_\nu}$



In the former section, we have noticed that for every space time, we would have an LIF in which the gravity is canceled. Using the mathematical language,we want to confirm the motion of particle in the frame of $x^\mu$, to do so, we define $\xi^\mu$ is the LIF coordinates of $x^\mu$. For a world line(If you are not familiar with world line please check the Special Relativity books) characterized by $\lambda$ it is clear that in LIF:

$$
\dfrac{\mathrm{d}^2\xi^\mu}{\mathrm{d}\lambda^2}=0
$$

$$
0= \dfrac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}\lambda}\dfrac{\mathrm{d}\xi^\mu}{\mathrm{d}\lambda}=\dfrac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}\lambda}\left(\frac{\partial\xi^\mu}{\partial x^\alpha}\dfrac{\mathrm{d} x^\alpha}{\mathrm{d}\lambda}\right)\\
=\dfrac{\mathrm{d}}{\mathrm{d}\lambda}\left(\frac{\partial\xi^\mu}{\partial x^\alpha}\right)\dfrac{\mathrm{d}x^\alpha}{\mathrm{d}\lambda}+\dfrac{\mathrm{d}^2x^\alpha}{\mathrm{d}\lambda^2} \frac{\partial\xi^\mu}{\partial x^\alpha}\\
=\frac{\partial^2\xi^\mu}{\partial x^\beta \partial x^\alpha}\dfrac{\mathrm{d} x^\beta}{\mathrm{d}\lambda}\dfrac{\mathrm{d} x^\alpha}{\mathrm{d}\lambda}+\dfrac{\mathrm{d}^2x^\alpha}{\mathrm{d}\lambda^2} \frac{\partial\xi^\mu}{\partial x^\alpha}\\
=\frac{\partial x^\nu}{\partial\xi^\mu}\frac{\partial^2\xi^\mu}{\partial x^\beta \partial x^\alpha}\dfrac{\mathrm{d} x^\beta}{\mathrm{d}\lambda}\dfrac{\mathrm{d} x^\alpha}{\mathrm{d}\lambda}+\dfrac{\mathrm{d}^2x^\alpha}{\mathrm{d}\lambda^2} \frac{\partial\xi^\mu}{\partial x^\alpha}\frac{\partial x^\nu}{\partial\xi^\mu}\\
=\frac{\partial x^\nu}{\partial\xi^\mu}\frac{\partial^2\xi^\mu}{\partial x^\beta \partial x^\alpha}\dfrac{\mathrm{d} x^\beta}{\mathrm{d}\lambda}\dfrac{\mathrm{d} x^\alpha}{\mathrm{d}\lambda}+\dfrac{\mathrm{d}^2x^\alpha}{\mathrm{d}\lambda^2} \delta_{\nu\alpha}
$$

That is:

$$
\left(\frac{\partial x^\nu}{\partial\xi^\mu}\frac{\partial^2\xi^\mu}{\partial x^\beta \partial x^\alpha}\right)\dfrac{\mathrm{d} x^\beta}{\mathrm{d}\lambda}\dfrac{\mathrm{d} x^\alpha}{\mathrm{d}\lambda}+\dfrac{\mathrm{d}^2x^\nu}{\mathrm{d}\lambda^2}=0
$$

Define $\frac{\partial x^\nu}{\partial\xi^\mu}\frac{\partial^2\xi^\mu}{\partial x^\beta \partial x^\alpha}=\Gamma^\nu_{\alpha\beta}$, the equation is:

$$
\Gamma^\nu_{\alpha\beta}\dfrac{\mathrm{d} x^\beta}{\mathrm{d}\lambda}\dfrac{\mathrm{d} x^\alpha}{\mathrm{d}\lambda}+\dfrac{\mathrm{d}^2x^\nu}{\mathrm{d}\lambda^2}=0
$$

(If you find these equation is hard to understand, please decompose them by Einstein's sum rule.)

This is the **Geodesic Equation**. and the $\Gamma^\nu_{\alpha\beta}$ is call **connections** which connect the original coordinate $x^\nu$ to the LIF coordinate $\xi^\mu$ at this space-time. So if we know the coordinate changing relation between LIF and Original one, we can quickly get the motion equation quickly. However, it is impossible for one to determine the relation between these two frame in application. The reason is:

+ The EP tell us you can find but not how to find, no first principle tell us how specific LIF form.
+ The LIF have a gauge freedom: $\Gamma^\nu_{\alpha\beta}=0\rightarrow\frac{\partial x^\nu}{\partial\xi^\mu}\frac{\partial^2\xi^\mu}{\partial x^\beta \partial x^\alpha}=0$(multiply both side by$\frac{\partial\xi^\rho}{\partial x^\nu}$) $\rightarrow\frac{\partial^2\xi^\rho}{\partial x^\beta \partial x^\alpha}=0\rightarrow\xi^\mu$ is linear with $x^\nu$.

However, we will see very soon that connection is linked with the metric of the coordinate which will be introduced in next section. We will also see the geodesic equation is just the "shortest path" in this coordinate. Also, the path is also the one which the momentum of particle along.

## Metric
Let us talk about metric.

Before go through the GR, we back to the SR,the fundamental principle of inertial system, and review the interval.

In special relativity, the quantity $ds^2=-dt^2+dx^2+dy^2+dz^2$(c=1) is the space-time interval or by the Einstein's sum law:

$$
ds^2=\eta_{\mu\nu}dx^\mu dx^v\\
\eta_{\mu\nu}=diag\{-1,1,1,1\}
$$

The interval is an invariant under the Lorentz transform. This fact consists with invariant light-speed. So, what is Einstein's great assumption that leads to the GR? Einstein equivalence principle suggest that: **In LIF, the special relativity holds.**. EEP leads to a basic quantity of GR: the metric.

$$
ds^2=\eta_{\mu\nu}d\xi^\mu d\xi^v\\
=\eta_{\mu\nu}\dfrac{\partial\xi^\mu}{\partial x^\alpha}\dfrac{\partial \xi^\nu}{\partial x^\beta}dx^\alpha dx^\beta\\
=g_{\alpha\beta}dx^\alpha dx^\beta
$$

$$g_{\alpha\beta}=\eta_{\mu\nu}\dfrac{\partial \xi^\mu}{\partial x^\alpha}\dfrac{\partial \xi^\nu}{\partial x^\beta}$$

The metric can be considered as the "unit" of distance. In America, people use miles as the unit. It is clear that 1 mile not equals to 1 km and we need to using the "metric" to convert them into same standard: 1 mile $\approx$ 1.6km. This 1.6 is nothing but the metric of American coordinate and International coordinate.

Also take the Euclidean geometry as an example. As all of us known, the infinitesimal distance changes in the Cartesian coordinates is: $ds^2=dx^2+dy^2+dz^2$(Pythagorean theorem). This is an fundamental relation in Euclidean geometry. And in sperical coordinates the answer is also trivial $ds^2=dr^2+r^2d\theta^2+r^2\sin^2\theta d\phi^2$. So, $(1,1,1)$, $(1, r^2,r^2sin^2\theta)$ is the metric of cartesian and spherical coordinates. We can immediately find that the metric reflects the relation between two coordinate.

Also, we define $g^{\alpha\beta}=\eta^{\alpha\beta}\dfrac{\partial \xi^\alpha}{dx^\mu}\dfrac{\partial\xi^\beta}{\partial x^\nu}$. One can simply prove that $g^{\alpha\gamma}g_{\gamma\beta}=\delta^\alpha_\beta$. 
and a brilliant observation suggests:

$$
\Gamma^\mu_{\alpha\beta}=\dfrac{1}{2}g^{\mu\gamma}(g_{\gamma\alpha,\beta}+g_{\gamma\beta,\alpha}-g_{\alpha\beta,\gamma})
$$

This is a good exercise for everyone who is interested in GR. Please try to prove it. So, if we now the metric, we can determined the connection and also the motion of particles in gravity fields.
 I will take some extra sections to introduce the physical means and the consequence of g. 
### Further discussion of g
#### 1. The Gravitational potential.
If the gravitational fields is under the Newton limitation, which means $g_{\mu\nu}=\eta_{\mu\nu}+h_{\mu\nu}$, where $h_{\mu\nu}\ll 1$ and also $\partial g_{\mu\nu}/\partial t=0$ (static condition). For a partical moves slowly and the dominant terms of geodesic equation is (using the time as the parameter of world lines.)

$$
\frac{d^2x^i}{dt^2}=-\Gamma^i_{00}=-\dfrac{1}{2}g^{i\gamma}(g_{\gamma0,0}+g_{\gamma0,0}-g_{00,\gamma})=\dfrac{1}{2}h_{00,i}+o(h^2)
$$

From Newton's gravation law and second law.

$$
g_{00}=-(1+2\psi)
$$

where $\psi$ is the gravitational potential $\psi=-GMm/r$. So, the metric is directly linked gravitation.

#### 2. Shortest path
Geodesic is the shortest path if we define the "distance" by g.

$$s=\int^1_0\sqrt{g_{\mu\nu} \dfrac{dx^\mu}{d\lambda}\dfrac{dx^\nu}{d\lambda}}d\lambda
$$

$$\delta s=\int^1_0\delta\sqrt{g_{\mu\nu} \dfrac{dx^\mu}{d\lambda}\dfrac{dx^\nu}{d\lambda}}d\lambda\\
=\int\dfrac{1}{2}\left(g_{\mu\nu} \dfrac{dx^\mu}{d\lambda}\dfrac{dx^\nu}{d\lambda}\right)^{-1/2}\left\{g_{\mu\nu,\alpha}\delta x^{\alpha}\dfrac{dx^\mu}{d\lambda}\dfrac{dx^\nu}{d\lambda}+2g_{\mu\nu}\dfrac{d\delta x^\mu}{d\lambda}\dfrac{dx^\nu}{d\lambda} \right\}d\lambda\\
\propto \int_0^1 g_{\mu\nu,\alpha}\delta x^{\alpha}\dfrac{dx^\mu}{d\lambda}\dfrac{dx^\nu}{d\lambda}+2g_{\mu\nu}\dfrac{d\delta x^\mu}{d\lambda}\dfrac{dx^\nu}{d\lambda} d\lambda\\
=\int_0^1 \left\{g_{\mu\nu,\alpha}\dfrac{dx^\mu}{d\lambda}\dfrac{dx^\nu}{d\lambda}-2\left(g_{\alpha\mu,\nu}\dfrac{d x^\mu}{d\lambda}\dfrac{dx^\nu}{d\lambda}+g_{\alpha\nu}\dfrac{d^2x^\nu}{d\lambda^2} \right)\right\} \delta x^{\alpha}d\lambda\\
=\int_0^1 \left\{g^{\rho\nu}\left(g_{\mu\theta,\rho}-2g_{\rho\mu,\theta}\right)\dfrac{d x^\mu}{d\lambda}\dfrac{dx^\theta}{d\lambda}+2\dfrac{d^2x^\nu}{d\lambda^2} \right\} g_{\alpha\nu}\delta x^{\alpha}d\lambda\\
=\int_0^1 \left\{g^{\rho\nu}\left(g_{\mu\theta,\rho}-g_{\rho\mu,\theta}-g_{\rho\theta,\mu}\right)\dfrac{d x^\mu}{d\lambda}\dfrac{dx^\theta}{d\lambda}+2\dfrac{d^2x^\nu}{d\lambda^2} \right\} g_{\alpha\nu}\delta x^{\alpha}d\lambda\\
=2\int_0^1\left\{\Gamma_{\mu\theta}^\nu\dfrac{d x^\mu}{d\lambda}\dfrac{dx^\theta}{d\lambda}+\dfrac{d^2x^\nu}{d\lambda^2}\right\}g_{\alpha\nu}\delta x^\alpha d\lambda
$$

So, $\Gamma_{\mu\theta}^\nu\dfrac{d x^\mu}{d\lambda}\dfrac{dx^\theta}{d\lambda}+\dfrac{d^2x^\nu}{d\lambda^2}=0$ is the shortest path which is also the geodesic.

### Summary:
The first important quantity describe the gravity is metric. For the particle which merely was forced gravitation, the path of particle is the geodesic. And the geodesic is also the shortest one which consists with our exp.

## Tensor, the Riemann Tensor. 

I don't want to focus on the mathematical details of tensors. 
